---
layout: post
title: Christian Missions and the Environment
---

*Missio Dei involves the redemption of all creation. To what extent should Christian missions take into account the environment?*
<!-- more -->
The inclusion of environmental concerns in Christian missions is generally not well accepted in many conservative Evangelical circles. This is more so in the United States, where environmental concern is linked to leftist 'tree-hugger' movements with pagan and pantheistic overtones. The Republican influence in the Evangelical circles also tend to view any environmental activism with suspicion, as it can be seen as an excuse for the government to interfere in business and trade with environmental-related taxations and restrictions. Together with a conservative streak in regarding mission as primarily anthropocentric and soteriological, these factors have led to a diminished emphasis on the environment in conservative Evangelical churches in the United States. With globalisation, the export of such brands of Evangelicalism may influence churches outside of the United States. However, such ideas about the environment and mission are unbiblical and myopic, and Christian missions need to include environmental concerns in their missions.

Understanding missions from the perspective of *missio Dei* plays an important role in seeing the environment as an aspect of Christian missions. Ever since 1932, when Karl Barth defined all missions as the activity of God, there has been a shift in the perspectives on mission. It is now acknowledged that there is a difference between the term 'missions' and 'mission'. The former is narrowly defined as the activities of the church and agencies, and the latter is the total task God has set for the salvation of the world (which includes the former as well). Thus, all missions should be part of God's mission; God is the center of all mission work, and mission flows from the love of God for His creation. The Church and other agencies' mission work is legitimate insomuch as it participates in God's mission. God's mission then includes all creation, since His plan is to restore fallen creation, including humans, to its original glory.

God has planned from eternity to 'gather up all things in [Christ], things in heaven and on earth' (Eph 1:10), since the 'creation was subjected to futility, not of its own will but by the will of the one who subjected it, in hope that creation itself will be set free from its bondage to decay and will obtain the freedom of the glory of the children of God' (Rom 8:20-21). Creation features in God's plan, and in the eschaton, creation will be glorified as well. Creation will not be annihilated, as some might think 2 Peter 3:11-13 implies. Rather than annihilation, those verses refer to an eschatological purging and renewal of the world. In fact, it is unthinkable that God would destroy the world, since He thought it to be good, and sits enthroned over it on the seventh day (Gen 1:1- 2:4). Rather, the purged and renewed creation will be the eternal dwelling place for God and man (Rev 21). As such, Christian missions, in participation with God's mission, should take into account the environment.

In caring for creation, Christians are merely doing what the Creator had told the first humanity to do, that is to 'till and keep it' (Gen 2:15). What is often not realised off the bat in our conversations about the environment is that God created the world good and He cares for it. God planted the garden and made it beautiful, and man's job is to look after it while at the same time getting sustenance from it. Surely creation care must be a fundamental Christian mission.

For Christians on the path of sanctification, environmental related missions is also a means to exercise compassion and justice. The depravity of man has caused great damage to the environment and great distress to the life forms living therein. These are the voiceless creation of God, who, though voiceless, give glory to God nonetheless (Ps 19). Therefore, in speaking up for the voiceless, in restoring and liberating them from the rampant exploitation and abuse, Christians are exercising compassion and justice. In so doing, they are a witness in the world for the Creator. Furthermore, in any destruction of the environment, those who suffer most are the poorest of people who depend on it for their livelihood. It is known that any adverse climate change would first impact the poorest of people, while the rich are relatively insulated from their effects. Caring for the environment is also caring for our fellow man.

In caring for the environment, Christian missions meet idolatrous ideologies head on. Earlier, it was said that conservative Evangelicals tend to view any environmental activism as pagan or pantheistic. However, the discussion thus far allows for Christians to reclaim such activism under the banner of God, and thus provide a witness for God to the pagans and pantheists. Through Christian environmental missions, it can be shown that care for creation can be done without divinizing creation, nor falling into confused speciesism, because there is a God who cares for His creation.

Ultimately, for any activism to have lasting change, the hearts of people must be changed, that is, people must be transformed by the Gospel and express genuine care for the environment from the inside out. Therefore, environmental missions should not replace the centrality of evangelization as missions. Or, in other words, if a church has limits on her mission budget, doing environmental work should not be the priority, unless effective evangelization opportunities can be factored in. Yet, such a church can still be participating in God's mission by adopting environmental friendly practices and urging individuals to do so on a personal basis.
